Update eo_guide.md (#1535)
CSCfi/csc-user-guide: docs/support/tutorials/gis/eo_guide.md

# Earth Observation guide

This guide aims to help researchers to work with Earth Observation (EO) data using CSC's computing resources. The purpose of this guide is to give an overview of available options, so it would be easier to decide if CSC has suitable services for your your EO reseach. It also helps you find the right data and tools for raster data based EO tasks. If you are interested in the fundamentals of EO, please check the [resources and further reading section](#resources-and-further-reading).

**What are the benefits of using EO data?**

* Possibility to observe wide areas at same time
* Non-intrusive, cost-efficient
* Same sensor for different parts of the world, easy to compare different areas
* Time series to see changes during different seasons and years

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! default "Raster data format"

    Most EO data is available in <a href="https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0" aria-label="Towards data science guide to raster data">raster format</a>. The most common file formats are <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF" aria-label="GeoTiff data format description">GeoTiff</a> and <a href="http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000" aria-label="GeoJPEG2000 data format description">GeoJPEG2000</a>.
```

Opinion: Rather here than at bottom of page

## Why should I use CSC computing resources for EO?

For working with EO data there are in general three main options:

1) **Special EO services**, which provide both data and advanced ready-to-use processing environments. Usually these give better user experience and efficiency, but the services might be limited in computing power, available tools or options for adding own data. Often these have fees for using.
2) **Commercial clouds** with local copy of open EO data. The data is practically always saved to object-storage and usually can be downloaded from anywhere as independent service. They provide also general computing services where EO data analysis tools need to be installed by the end-user. The most common option for processing in the cloud are virtual machines. These options usually have some fees, mainly for processing. The data download may be free of charge or then have some small costs depending on the amount of data needed. Data download costs might be smaller if using virtual machines of the same cloud provider in the same region.

> 3) **Own processing environment** - PC, local cluster. All data needs to be downloaded to this system and all tools must be installed, which requires extra effort. On the other hand it gives more freedom to select the tools and set-up. Usually this does not cause any extra costs, but the computing power is usually rather limited.

Reviewer: removed platforms, can this be committed?

> 3) **Own processing environment** - PC, local cluster. All data needs to be downloaded to this system and all tools must be installed, which requires extra effort. On the other hand it gives more freedom to select the tools and set-up. Usually this does not cause any extra costs, but the computing power is usually rather limited.

Author: This is ok, but the buttons are gray...

> 3) **Own processing environment** - PC, local cluster. All data needs to be downloaded to this system and all tools must be installed, which requires extra effort. On the other hand it gives more freedom to select the tools and set-up. Usually this does not cause any extra costs, but the computing power is usually rather limited.

Author: Sorry, for some reason did not see this before.

**[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)**: Sentinel, Landsat, MODIS etc. STAC available. It is currently available in preview.

[**Google Cloud Storage open EO data**](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets), including Sentinel-2 L1C and Landsat: Collection 1 data. Data can be downloaded from here for example with [FORCE](../../../apps/force.md).
    
[**Terramonitor**](https://www.terramonitor.com/services/analysis-ready) provides pre-prosessed, analysis ready Sentinel-2 data from Finland available between 2018-2020. Commercial service.

!!! default "Other geospatial datasets"

    To find other geospatial datasets, check out [CSC open spatial dataset list](https://research.csc.fi/open-gis-data).  

## How can I process EO data at CSC?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* User skills and preferences
    * Graphical User Interface (GUI)
    * Command Line Interface (CLI)
    * Scripting
* User needs
    * Batch processing
    * Automation
    * Reproducibility
* Open source vs commercial
    * This guide focusses on [software available on CSC supercomputer Puhti](../../../apps/index.md) 
```

Author: I do not see that this list really helps. Scripting/CLI is mentioned elsewhere, for software people are still I think mostly looking for functionality and in bigger cases speed..

Reviewer: I think it does, at it is not often thought about when choosing a tool. Especially the needs. And when growing up at university with commercial software one does not necessarily think about FOSS, until you end up working somewhere without all the nice licenses from univeristy. Luckily it is changing now slowly. 
Updated the text also.
What does it hurt to have it here?

[**Julia**](../../../apps/julia.md) - Puhtis Julia installation does not include any geospatial packages, but they can be installed by the user. [JuliaGeo](https://github.com/JuliaGeo) provides an overview of packages for geospatial data.

[**Matlab**](../../../apps/matlab.md) - you can run Matlab jobs on Puhti conveniently from your own computers Matlab installation.

[**Orfeo Toolbox (OTB)**](../../../apps/otb.md) - offers a wide variety of applications from ortho-rectification or pansharpening, all the way to classification, SAR processing, and much more. Orfeo Toolbox is available as CLI, GUI and via Python interface.

[**Python**](../../../apps/python.md)

* The [geoconda module](../../../apps/geoconda.md) provides many useful Python packages for raster data processing and analysis, inc best tools for working with STAC catalogues.
* [Machine learning modules](../../../apps/index.md#data-analytics-and-machine-learning) provide all common machine learning frameworks, also for deep learning.

> [**QGIS**](../../../apps/qgis.md) - is a very widely used GUI for working with spatial data, it has also limited multispectral image processing capabilities.  GUI with batch processing possibility and Python interface. Used for example for visualization, map algebra and other raster processing. Many plug-ins available, for EO data processing, check out the [QGIS Semi-automatic classification plugin](https://fromgistors.blogspot.com/p/semi-automatic-classification-plugin.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**QGIS**](../../../apps/qgis.md) - general open source GIS (Geographic Information System) for working with spatial data with limited multispectral image processing capabilities.  GUI with batch processing possibility and Python interface. Used for example for visualization, map algebra and other raster processing. Many plug-ins available; for EO data processing, check out the [QGIS Semi-automatic classification plugin](https://fromgistors.blogspot.com/p/semi-automatic-classification-plugin.html).
```

Author: general open source GIS - even if that is the origin of the name, then it is very bad description, would not use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**QGIS**](../../../apps/qgis.md) - open source tool with GUI for working with spatial data including limited multispectral image processing capabilities.  GUI with batch processing possibility and Python interface. Used for example for visualization, map algebra and other raster processing. Many plug-ins available, for EO data processing, check out the [QGIS Semi-automatic classification plugin](https://fromgistors.blogspot.com/p/semi-automatic-classification-plugin.html).
```

> [**R**](../../../apps/r-env-for-gis.md) - Puhti R installation includes a lot of geospatial packages, includeing serveral useful for EO data processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**R**](../../../apps/r-env-for-gis.md) - Puhti R installation includes a lot of geospatial packages, includeing serveral useful for EO data processing, such as `terra`, `CAST`, `raster` and `spacetime`.
```

[**Sen2Cor**](../../../apps/sen2cor.md) - a command-line tool for Sentinel-2 Level 2A product generation and formatting.

[**Sen2mosaic**](../../../apps/sen2cor.md) - a command-line tool to download, preprocess and mosaic Sentinel-2 data.

[**SNAP**](../../../apps/snap.md) - ESA Sentinel Application Platform. Tool for processing of Sentinel data (+ support for other data sources). GUI, CLI (Graph Processing Tool, GPT) and Python interfaces. [SNAP GPT example for Puhti](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/snap).

If you need further applications, you can ask CSC to install them for you. 
 
### Machine Learning with EO data

One example of the advanced usage of EO data is for machine learning. If you are interested in the topic, you can find a lot of examples from [CSC machine learning with spatial data course materials]( https://github.com/csc-training/GeoML). For practical guidelines, see also [CSC machine learning guide](../ml-guide.md)

## Alternative processing services

> Below is a list of alternative EO processing services that might be useful, when a lot of data is required and downloading it all to CSC might not be feasible. All of them include the main open datasets: Sentinel, Landsat, MODIS etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a list of alternative EO platforms that might be useful, when a lot of data is required and downloading it all to CSC might not be feasible. 
```

Author: I would not call them all platforms.. Also why not include the main datasets?

Reviewer: "main datasets": I don't think it adds anything here. Not everyone is looking for those datasets.
EO processing service ok.

> **[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires registration, but is free of charge for research users. It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available (<a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/" aria-label="GEE data catalogue">browse the catalogue</a>). In general, JavaScript is used on the platform, but also  <a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install" aria-label="Python on GEE">Python</a>  and  <a href="https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee" aria-label="R on GEE">R</a> support exists. Check out [GEE's tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires registration, but is currently free of charge for research users. It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available (<a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/" aria-label="GEE data catalogue">browse the catalogue</a>). In general, JavaScript is used on the platform, but also  <a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install" aria-label="Python on GEE">Python</a>  and  <a href="https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee" aria-label="R on GEE">R</a> support exists. Check out [GEE's tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.
```

> **[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)**. For computing it offers JupyterHub together with Dask Gateway, both CPUs and GPUs are available. It is currently available in preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)** offers JupyterHub together with Dask Gateway, both CPUs and GPUs are available. It is currently available in preview.
```

>  **[Data and Information Access Services (DIAS)](https://www.copernicus.eu/en/access-data/dias)** cloud based Virtual Machines (VMs), dedicated baremetal servers, containers, operating system and software images. Specialized in EO, user support available. Commercial services. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 **[Data and Information Access Services (DIAS)](https://www.copernicus.eu/en/access-data/dias)** offer cloud based Virtual Machines (VMs), dedicated baremetal servers, containers, operating system and software images. These services are specialized in EO and have user support available. All of them are commercial services. 
```

> [**Sentinelhub**](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/explore/). Several different APIs. Commercial service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**Sentinelhub**](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/explore/) is a commercial service that offers several different APIs.
```

> **Commercial clouds**: Amazon, Google Cloud and Microsoft Azure, all provide virtual machines and other processing services, all of them have some local data, see links above. No EO support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Commercial clouds**: Amazon, Google Cloud and Microsoft Azure, all provide virtual machines and other processing services, all of them have some local data, see links above. 
```

Reviewer: I don't think that "thinking that they do not offer it" is enough reason to put it as info here.

* [Echoes in space - Introduction to RADAR remote sensing](https://eo-college.org/courses/echoes-in-space/) by the European Space Agency; "a detailed insight into the history of Radar technology, including all the basics that are needed to understand how electromagnetic waves work and a unique hands-on experience to work with Radar data in diverse application scenarios."
* [Newcomers guide to Earth Observation](https://business.esa.int/newcomers-earth-observation-guide) by the European Space Agency, "a  guide to help non-experts in providing a starting point in the decision process for selecting an appropriate Earth Observation (EO) solution."
* [Earthdatascience intro to multispectral data](https://www.earthdatascience.org/courses/use-data-open-source-python/multispectral-remote-sensing/intro-multispectral-data/)

Further reading:
* [CSC geocomputing seminar materials](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing-seminars), especially materials of the 2022 EO-workshop
* [ESA tutorials](https://step.esa.int/main/doc/tutorials/)
* [Awesome EO code](https://github.com/acgeospatial/awesome-earthobservation-code), long list of EO tools

> !!! default "Raster data format"

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

>     Most EO data is available in <a href="https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0" aria-label="Towards data science guide to raster data">raster format</a>. The most common file formats are <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF" aria-label="GeoTiff data format description">GeoTiff</a> and <a href="http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000" aria-label="GeoJPEG2000 data format description">GeoJPEG2000</a>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

**[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)** provides a STAC of all available data, which includes Sentinel, Landsat, MODIS. It is currently available in preview.

[**Google Cloud Storage open EO data**](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets), including Sentinel-2 L1C and Landsat Collection 1 data. Data can be downloaded for example with [FORCE](../../../apps/force.md).
    
[**Terramonitor**](https://www.terramonitor.com/services/analysis-ready) provides pre-prosessed, analysis ready Sentinel-2 data from Finland available between 2018-2020. It is a commercial service.

!!! default "Other geospatial datasets"

    To find other geospatial datasets, check out [CSC open spatial dataset list](https://research.csc.fi/open-gis-data).  

## How can I process EO data at CSC?

> * User skills and preferences

Author: The suggest change does not work here.. I would move this below the text with geocomputing page link. And change to this:

### What to consider when chosing software?

* Functionality 
* Interaction type:
    * Graphical User Interface (GUI)
    * Command Line Interface (CLI)
    * Scripting
* Technical aspects:
    * Support for parallel computing or batch processing
    * Computationally efficient 
    * Supported operating systems
    * Automation
    * Reproducibility
* Open source vs proprietary
    * Proprietary tools need licenses which may be expensive and/or limiting the use of the tool
    * FOSS (free and open source software) allows the user to inspect the source code and provide high level insights in its functionality

Reviewer: added it into text, see last commit
